[DelayedClipboard] Add sections on handling browser/tab close and on privacy (#742)
MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers: DelayedClipboard/DelayedClipboardRenderingExplainer.md

navigator.clipboard.write([clipboardItemInput]);
```

## What happens to the clipboard data on Tab/Browser Close?

> 1. Add a `beforeunload` event listener: A web author could choose to `preventDefault` `beforeunload` event and notify the user that there is some data pending to be written into the clipboard. In this event handler, web authors could use a new clipboard API (like `navigator.clipboard.undelayFormats([""]` or something similar) to write the data for the formats that were delay rendered.

Author: Done.

e.g.
```js
function generateExpensiveCustomFormatBlob() {
// Produce the expensive data here...
....
return new Blob....
}
const clipboard_item = new ClipboardItem({

>                 'text/html': Promise.resolve(generateExpensiveCustomFormatBlob)

Author: Yeah we discussed this one in the delay rendering issue: https://github.com/w3c/editing/issues/417#issuecomment-1483665810 and chose to be consistent with the current design in `getType` and `ClipboardItem` constructors that use Promise to a `Blob` or `DOMString`. An example where returning a promise might be helpful is during a fetch operation to produce image data.

                });
navigator.clipboard.write([clipboard_item]);

const beforeUnloadListener = (event) => {
      event.preventDefault();
       navigator.clipboard.undelayFormats(['text/html']`);
      return (event.returnValue = "");
 };
```

**Problems with this approach**

> Chrome doesn't allow to customize the message that is shown to the user, so this could be confusing to the user if the default dialog shows up due to formats being delay rendered. Moreover, it's also detrimental to the performance of the site if there is a beforeunload event listener attached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chromium doesn't allow the message that is shown to the user to be customized, so this could be confusing to the user if the default dialog shows up due to formats being delay rendered. Moreover, it's also detrimental to the performance of the site if there is a beforeunload event listener attached.
```

Author: Done.

4. Throw away all the delay rendered formats and put empty data for those formats in the clipboard: It would be a bad user experience, but a web author could also choose to not populate the formats that were registered for delay rendering.

5. Browsers could choose to show a confirmation dialog if there is any delay rendered formats in the clipboard: Although it is similar to option 1, here the text of the dialog explicitly mentions delay rendering of formats which is more informative to the the user. This option has similar concerns as option 1, but it does affect navigations, so it slows down browser/tab shutdown behavior.

More info [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1H6ow7RWa4MeycKP3OQBoMhLuMaJct3jSCWW6apcVu9U/edit?usp=sharing)

### Proposal

Proposal is a hybrid of options 2 and 4

> 1. At least one built-in format must be written to the clipboard without delay as part of the write operation so there will be some data on the clipboard (could be a low fidelity `text/plain` format) if the browser/tab closes and the site doesn't get a chance to generate the data for the delay rendered formats within the timeout window. If the site only writes one format to the clipboard, then it can't be delay rendered.

Author: The initial proposal is to throw an exception, but if that affects developer ergonomics, then we can change it to just trigger the callback for one format. We will have to experiment with our Excel Online partners first to see which one they prefer.

2. If a delay rendered callback is already running before the page unloads, cancel the callback after a timeout period if the callback hasn't completed yet. When the callback is cancelled, set empty data to the clipboard for that delay rendered format.

> 3. If site registered for `beforeunload` event to run the callback, run the callback but cancel it if it exceeds a timeout period so it doesn't cause delays in navigation.

Author: Clarified but I think you raised some interesting points that needs further discussion, so I added a note here. Thanks for this comment!

## Privacy and Security Considerations

> ### Privacy

Reviewer 2: Here's a privacy concern you may or may not have already considered. Sorry if this is already captured somewhere.

Consider, I dunno, a dedicated user of WordPerfect or some other once-popular, now-esoteric application. A malicious web site says that it can generate a WordPerfect document. The user cuts some content from the web site and pastes it into WordPerfect. The browser now calls the WordPerfect format callback, and the website now knows that this user is one of the like 5 remaining humans who use that tool. This seems like some very interesting entropy from a fingerprinting perspective.

Now imagine, instead of WordPerfect, the scenario is instead some domain-specific application which is popular amongst some marginalized communit{y,ies}. Now we're revealing to the site that the user is probably a member of said communit{y,ies}.

Author: @hober Thank you for your comment and highlighting the privacy issue! I did capture a somewhat similar issue in the section below with an image that describes this privacy issue in more detail. Please let me know if I'm missing anything here. Thanks! 

There are few things that we want to mention here:
1. During copy, at least in Chromium, the clipboard permission prompt serves as a trust mechanism which means the user trusts the web app to access the system clipboard. If a malicious site tricks the user into obtaining this trust, then it is really hard to prevent that site from gaining access to the system clipboard.
2. When the malicious site tricks the user into copying WordPerfect format, the user *has* to paste it in an app that reads that format, otherwise the format never gets read and the callback never gets triggered.
3. If we restrict the number of web custom formats to 1 or 2, then we limit the apps that can be detected by sites that write web custom formats for fingerprinting purposes. Note that if the source app doesn't produce the right data for the web custom format during paste, then the paste would fail and the user will know that the site doesn't support this format, so it's hard for user to trust this site after the initial copy-paste operation.
4. There could be more than one app that supports the WordPerfect format, so at best it gives some fuzzy details about the app ecosystem where the paste happened.

@evanstade @dandclark @sanketj anything you would like to add here?

Author: Also, added the example you mentioned in your comment. We can discuss more in https://github.com/w3c/editing/issues/439. Thanks!

* Delay rendering of web custom formats

>   * Web custom formats are specific to an app ecosystem. When a site registers a callback for a web custom format, it doesn't know where the user is going to paste until the user performs the paste in an app that supports pasting of the web custom format that was copied. On paste, when the web custom format is read from the clipboard, the clipboard calls back into the browser to trigger the callback that was registered for this format so it can return the data to the paste target. The site would know the app or have some fuzzy details about the app where the user is pasting the data into.

Reviewer: Probably helpful to link at the beginning of this to something where readers can learn what web custom formats are. Either something like https://developer.chrome.com/blog/web-custom-formats-for-the-async-clipboard-api/ or our own explainer if it's up to date.

Author: Done.

>   * Web custom formats are specific to an app ecosystem. When a site registers a callback for a web custom format, it doesn't know where the user is going to paste until the user performs the paste in an app that supports pasting of the web custom format that was copied. On paste, when the web custom format is read from the clipboard, the clipboard calls back into the browser to trigger the callback that was registered for this format so it can return the data to the paste target. The site would know the app or have some fuzzy details about the app where the user is pasting the data into.

Reviewer: Maybe consider linking to https://github.com/w3c/editing/issues/439

Author: Done.

>   * Web custom formats are specific to an app ecosystem. When a site registers a callback for a web custom format, it doesn't know where the user is going to paste until the user performs the paste in an app that supports pasting of the web custom format that was copied. On paste, when the web custom format is read from the clipboard, the clipboard calls back into the browser to trigger the callback that was registered for this format so it can return the data to the paste target. The site would know the app or have some fuzzy details about the app where the user is pasting the data into.

Reviewer: Optional change in wording of the last sentence could make it a little more clear what the privacy issue is:
"The site would know the app or have some fuzzy details about the app where the user is pasting the data into." could be changed to something like "By registering delay-rendered custom formats on the clipboard and tracking if and when particular delay render callbacks get called, the site can make some educated guesses about which applications or webpages the user is pasting data into. "

Author: Done.

**Problems with this approach**
This option has similar concerns as option 1, but it does affect navigations, so it slows down browser/tab shutdown behavior.

More info [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1H6ow7RWa4MeycKP3OQBoMhLuMaJct3jSCWW6apcVu9U/edit?usp=sharing)

### Proposal

Proposal is a hybrid of options 2 and 3

1. At least one built-in format must be written to the clipboard without delay as part of the write operation so there will be some data on the clipboard (could be a low fidelity `text/plain` format) if the browser/tab closes and the site doesn't get a chance to generate the data for the delay rendered formats within the timeout window. If the site only writes one format to the clipboard, then an exception would be thrown to prevent the write operation.

2. If a delay rendered callback is already running before the page unloads, cancel the callback after a timeout period if the callback hasn't completed yet. When the callback is cancelled, set empty data to the clipboard for that delay rendered format.

> 3. Run the callback before the `beforeunload` event is fired and if it exceeds a timeout period, set empty data to the clipboard for that delay rendered format so it doesn't cause delays in navigation.

Reviewer: If I'm understanding this part of the proposal correctly I think it could be stated a bit more precisely:
```suggestion
3. For any delay-rendered format that still hasn't been resolved at the time that the UA would fire `beforeunload`, run its callback before the `beforeunload` event is fired. For any such callback that hasn't completed within a timeout period, set empty data to the clipboard for that delay rendered format so it doesn't cause delays in navigation.
```

Author: Sounds good, I added this one instead. Thanks!
